Frequency modulation (FM) is the encoding of information in a carrier wave by varying the instantaneous frequency of the wave. The technology is used in telecommunications, radio broadcasting, signal processing, and computing. Theory In analog frequency modulation, such as radio broadcasting, of an audio signal representing voice or music, the instantaneous frequency deviation, i.e. the difference between the frequency of the carrier and its center frequency, has a functional relation to the modulating signal amplitude. Sinusoidal baseband signal Digital data can be encoded and transmitted with a type of frequency modulation known as frequency-shift keying (FSK), in which the instantaneous frequency of the carrier is shifted among a set of frequencies. The frequencies may represent digits, such as '0' and '1'. FSK is widely used in computer modems, such as fax modems, telephone caller ID systems, garage door openers, and other low-frequency transmissions. Radioteletype also uses FSK. Modulation index Frequency modulation is widely used for FM radio broadcasting. It is also used in telemetry, radar, seismic prospecting, and monitoring newborns for seizures via EEG, two-way radio systems, sound synthesis, magnetic tape-recording systems and some video-transmission systems. In radio transmission, an advantage of frequency modulation is that it has a larger signal-to-noise ratio and therefore rejects radio frequency interference better than an equal power amplitude modulation (AM) signal. For this reason, most music is broadcast over FM radio.  Bessel functions However, under severe enough multipath conditions it performs much more poorly than AM, with distinct high frequency noise artifacts that are audible with lower volumes and less complex tones.  With high enough volume and carrier deviation audio distortion starts to occur that otherwise wouldn't be present without multipath or with an AM signal. Carson's rule Frequency modulation and phase modulation are the two complementary principal methods of angle modulation; phase modulation is often used as an intermediate step to achieve frequency modulation. These methods contrast with amplitude modulation, in which the amplitude of the carrier wave varies, while the frequency and phase remain constant. Noise reduction If the information to be transmitted (i.e., the baseband signal) is xm(t){\displaystyle x_{m}(t)} and the sinusoidal carrier is xc(t)=Accos⁡(2πfct){\displaystyle x_{c}(t)=A_{c}\cos(2\pi f_{c}t)\,}, where fc is the carrier's base frequency, and Ac is the carrier's amplitude, the modulator combines the carrier with the baseband data signal to get the transmitted signal: Implementation where fΔ=KfAm{\displaystyle f_{\Delta }=K_{f}A_{m}}, Kf{\displaystyle K_{f}} being the sensitivity of the frequency modulator and Am{\displaystyle A_{m}} being the amplitude of the modulating signal or baseband signal. Modulation In this equation, f(τ){\displaystyle f(\tau )\,} is the instantaneous frequency of the oscillator and fΔ{\displaystyle f_{\Delta }\,} is the frequency deviation, which represents the maximum shift away from fc in one direction, assuming xm(t) is limited to the range ±1. Demodulation It is important to realize that this process of integrating the instantaneous frequency to create an instantaneous phase is quite different from what the term "frequency modulation" naively implies, namely directly adding the modulating signal to the carrier frequency Applications which would result in a modulated signal that has spurious local minima and maxima that do not correspond to those of the carrier.  Doppler effect While most of the energy of the signal is contained within fc ± fΔ, it can be shown by Fourier analysis that a wider range of frequencies is required to precisely represent an FM signal. The frequency spectrum of an actual FM signal has components extending infinitely, although their amplitude decreases and higher-order components are often neglected in practical design problems. Magnetic tape storage Mathematically, a baseband modulating signal may be approximated by a sinusoidal continuous wave signal with a frequency fm. This method is also named as single-tone modulation. The integral of such a signal is: Sound In this case, the expression for y(t) above simplifies to: Radio where the amplitude Am{\displaystyle A_{m}\,} of the modulating sinusoid is represented in the peak deviation fΔ=KfAm{\displaystyle f_{\Delta }=K_{f}A_{m}} (see frequency deviation). See also The harmonic distribution of a sine wave carrier modulated by such a sinusoidal signal can be represented with Bessel functions; this provides the basis for a mathematical understanding of frequency modulation in the frequency domain. References As in other modulation systems, the modulation index indicates by how much the modulated variable varies around its unmodulated level. It relates to variations in the carrier frequency: Further reading where fm{\displaystyle f_{m}\,} is the highest frequency component present in the modulating signal xm(t), and Δf{\displaystyle \Delta {}f\,} is the peak frequency-deviation – i.e. the maximum deviation of the instantaneous frequency from the carrier frequency. For a sine wave modulation, the modulation index is seen to be the ratio of the peak frequency deviation of the carrier wave to the frequency of the modulating sine wave. Ext